Patrick Wright
Professor Taylor
English 1030.49
2 November 2025
The Definition of ‘Progress.’ A Dialogue on Technological Promise
Characters of the Dialogue

Techne, a philosopher who believes humanity is controlled by technology
Historia, a historian studying the effect of technology
Futurus, optimist, sees technology as a way into the future
Seni, mechanical engineering student, studying progress

Scene: Inside the university library late at night. Techne is reading a paper next to a window. Historia is carrying a stack of documents. Futurus has a tablet with artwork spread across the screen. They all gather around a table and watch as Seni spreads out books. 

Seni: Thanks for meeting me here everyone. Recently I’ve pondered a question that seems easy, but could have vast consequences. Is technological progress always progress? As a student entering mechanical engineering, I must understand this question in order to build my future in technology. 

Techne: Your question assumes that technology is something we control, what if the opposite is true? What if technology is what makes up our society, in the process transforming people and things into a resource that is simply being optimized. The Atlantic’s essay on technology’s effect on the way we think explains this well. 

Futurus: You sound hopeless, surely you’re not suggesting we should abandon technology and innovation right?

Techne: Not at all Futurus. As tech critics have explained, technology develops at its own pace , developing faster than we can ethically determine the effects. Once something becomes possible, it becomes likely. 

Historia: I understand your point Techne, but I think you’re missing a key point. I believe technology doesn’t have its own momentum, but instead, technology embodies human choices. For example, in the 1920s an urban planner, Moses, decided to build low height bridges in New York to keep buses out of certain neighborhoods, therefore excluding lower income people.
Seni: So Historia, you’re saying technology carries politics within?

Historia: Exactly. As another example, let's consider the atomic bomb in Hiroshima. This device represented a scientific breakthrough, a milestone in physics and engineering. However, it also meant an unthinkable amount of human death and suffering. Let’s also look at agriculture. We solved food scarcity in many parts of the world, but we must now experience the effects of environmental pollution and devastation as a result. Research on agricultural effects on the environment show these consequences.

Futurus: I strike you as a pessimist Historia. You’re focusing on just the failures. How about the towns and communities that use technology for liberation? Afrofuturism in itself shows that technology can be used to describe and advance cultures, defining people as we know it. Afrofuturism allows people to reimagine the history of African Americans and create a future where they thrive. Technology like this can be used to build a better future for civilization. 

Techne: I admire your vision for a better future, however imagination in itself doesn’t change relationships. In the novel Brave New World, Huxley shows the reader that by removing pain and suffering, you can strip a person of their individuality. This is a perfect example of how optimization/efficiency can be transformed into oppression.

Futurus: That's a great example, however Huxley wrote a dystopian fiction book, not a prophecy. As a counter point, the show Black Mirror presents scenarios like “Nosedive,” where each person has an alterable social rating. These scenarios are warnings to what might happen if we start to quantify personality and individuality, but they’re not inevitabilities.

Historia: That’s where these two sides, pessimistic and optimistic intertwine. The Amnesty International report on AI surveillance shows this. Technology like facial recognition could be used to find missing children or to enforce an authoritarian regime. The technology in itself is neutral, but the way we use it isn’t. Research published in Science and Engineering Ethics shows this by confirming that tech systems embed the biases of their creators. 

Techne: Well, circling back to what I said in the beginning of our conversation, can we truly say technology is neutral when it develops faster than our ethics? As The Guardian notes, AI is advancing at a rate that makes it impossible to regulate, carrying us forward no matter our intentions.

Seni: After listening to all three of you, I started to realize something. Techne, you are definitely right to assume that technology shapes how we see the world. Historia, you proved that technology and artifacts carry political meanings, solving problems while generating new ethical dilemmas. Futurus, you allowed me to realize that human imagination matters and that we can imagine empowering futures instead of dystopian ones. 
Futurus: It seems like you’re starting to understand that no one really knows the answer. 

Seni: That's true, it seems my question was flawed from the very beginning. The real question should be “Progress for whom, and defined by what values?” This question considers the fact that technology isn’t inherently bad but is instead shaped by human choices and imaginations.

Historia: That's a better question, but how will it help you in real life scenarios? You’ll be creating these technologies as a mechanical engineer.

Seni: Great question, it means that I must ask different questions when developing a product or solution. Not just “Can we build this” but also “Who benefits and who doesn’t?” Bridges, atomic bombs, and industrial agriculture weren’t created by evil people, they were created by curious people trying to do the right thing. 

Techne: You’re starting to understand how technology really enframes society as a whole. Technology shows the world to people through a framework that we must remain vigilant of, rather than accepting it as natural. 

Seni: Yes, but it got me thinking. Since we’re able to resist the past framework of new technology through carefully selective design, we should be able to purposefully embed different ideas into technology. 

Futurus: Now we’re talking! This is exactly how Afrofuturist people think. By imagining and building technologies that show certain values rather than oppressive ones, we can build a better future.

Historia: I agree,  however, we must learn from history’s lessons. Every technical solution ever has created new problems of their own. We need to develop a more ethical imagination in order to build a future that is worth living. The ability to anticipate problems and the consequences of those very problems might be what allows us to keep innovating ethically. 

Seni: This brings me to the synthesis of all of your ideas. Techne has taught me that technology isn’t just a tool, but instead something that shapes us as we shape it. Historia has allowed me to see into technology to examine the political and power structures embedded inside. Futurus has reminded me that we’re not helpless, we can guide the path to innovation through imagination and design. 

Techne: And what do you think you’ll do with this Seni?

Seni: I’ll incorporate this Synthesis into my engineering process by advocating for a more deliberate and well thought development process. I’ll make sure to include diverse voices and consider long term consequences with the problems of my solutions. I’ll try to stop the idea of innovation always needing to accelerate and I’ll work on embedding different ideas into the technology I build. 

Futurus: I love that idea, you sound hopeful for the future and what you’re going to change, but not claiming that you can solve everything. 

Seni: No, because this conversation has given me a critical lens, not a final answer. Progress is something that we must create through imagination.

Historia: So, what you’re saying is that technological progress is only progress when it emerges from ethical planning and when it acknowledges the vast consequences.

Techne: That's interesting, I expect technology to still enframe your intentions however.

Seni: I hope to accept that challenge by questioning assumptions and by remembering that whatever I build will shape the future of humanity and the way they think or innovate. 

Futurus: Perhaps the real progress is the wisdom developed to guide innovation towards a better future.  

Seni: Correct. Wisdom begins by asking better questions, questions that I’ll carry far beyond this library. 

[The four gather their materials, having transformed a simple question into a complex philosophical understanding.]










Works Cited
Amnesty International. “Amnesty International Report 2022/23: The State of the World’s Human Rights.” Amnesty International, 27 Mar. 2023, www.amnesty.org/en/documents/pol10/5670/2023/en/.
Brooker, Charlie. Black Mirror. 2011, disc Nosedive. Accessed 2 Nov. 2025.
Carr, Nicholas. “Is Google Making Us Stupid?” The Atlantic, July 2008, www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2008/07/is-google-making-us-stupid/306868/.
Eshun, Kodwo. “Further Considerations on Afrofuturism.” CR: The New Centennial Review, vol. 3, no. 2, 2003, pp. 287–302, www.jstor.org/stable/41949397.
Greenhouse, Steven. “We Must Start Preparing the US Workforce for the Effects of AI – Now.” The Guardian, 29 Feb. 2024, www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/feb/29/ai-workers-layoffs-surveillance.
Harari, Yuval Noah. “Why Technology Favors Tyranny.” The Atlantic, The Atlantic, 30 Aug. 2018, www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/10/yuval-noah-harari-technology-tyranny/568330/.
HAZELL, PETER. “Agriculture and the Environment.” Environment and Development Economics, vol. 6, no. 4, 2001, pp. 516–521. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/44382119, https://doi.org/10.2307/44382119.
Huxley, Aldous. Brave New World. HarperCollins, 4 Feb. 1932.
Lynch, William . “Engineering Practice and Engineering Ethics on JSTOR.” Jstor.org, 2025, www.jstor.org/stable/690111, https://doi.org/10.2307/690111. Accessed 7 Feb. 2025.
National Archives. “The Atomic Bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.” National Archives Museum, 26 Aug. 2020, visit.archives.gov/whats-on/explore-exhibits/atomic-bombing-hiroshima-and-nagasaki.
Szeman, Imre. “Culture and Globalization, Or, the Humanities in Ruins.” CR: The New Centennial Review, vol. 3, no. 2, 2003, pp. 91–115. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/41949389, https://doi.org/10.2307/41949389.
Winner, Langdon. “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” Daedalus, vol. 109, no. 1, 1980, pp. 121–136, www.jstor.org/stable/20027310.







