The goal of a rhetorical analysis is to analyze how a specific text uses rhetoric to address an audience and achieve its purpose. For this first assignment, you’ll consider how a recent text addresses and shapes a community that you belong to or have a stake in.

Assignment: Choose a text about something important to you, to which you feel a connection (a hobby, academic interest, community, event, idea, etc). Your text should be recent and should be a text that has a persuasive aim. Finally, your selected text must be primarily written, or written in combination with visuals.

Write an analysis of your text that includes the following required elements:

Explain your text’s rhetorical situation: its purpose/exigence, audience, genre, when and where it was published or distributed, etc. What is it trying to make its audience do or think? What broader context does it speak to or participate in?
Identify specific rhetorical strategies that show how your text addresses this rhetorical situation. How might those choices affect the text’s audience? How do they affect or shape its overall meaning or impact? Rhetorical choices might include (but are not limited to): structure, style, layout, tone, emotional appeals, vocabulary/etymology, appeals to values/morals, inside jokes/language, use of evidence/data, etc.
Organize your essay around a thesis that considers the communities and identities your text is shaping, reflecting, critiquing, and/or ignoring. How does this text challenge or affirm specific perceptions and/or values? How does it contribute to our understanding of a specific community (or multiple)? How does it create boundaries and shape cultural meaning? How is it shaping the broader context it is responding to or participating in?
Tips for Success

Write for an audience of your peers and me, showing us what you find interesting about the text you’re analyzing. While your essay should follow general conventions for academic writing in terms of structure, argument, and evidence, please write like a human being, using first-person and language you would use in your everyday life.
Draw on the kinds of rhetorical strategies and analyses we’ve discussed in class. If you incorporate technical language about specific rhetorical strategies, be sure to gloss or explain those terms in your own words.
I do not expect you to incorporate any sources other than the text you are analyzing, but if you do choose to include other sources to illuminate your text’s rhetorical situation, be sure to cite those sources in-text and include them in your Works Cited.
Length: 800-900 words, Times New Roman, 12 pt font, double-spaced.

Sources: Provide a link to your text as well as a citation in MLA format in your Works Cited.

 

Rubric: See the “Argumentative Rubric”

 

Addendum for Clarity: 

We have covered a number of rhetorical theories and approaches so far. In this assignment, students will analyze a written piece through one or more of those theories and approaches. Technically, the chosen piece should be “argumentative,” but everything is argumentative. This sentence, and the previous ones, are arguments even if don’t explicitly state their justification or evidence (though, this one does). So, I leave the door open for what kind of written text you wish to analyze. Once you’ve chosen the text you want to analyze, think about it and see which theory or concept(s) best apply or which theory and concepts you want to apply.

This project gives you experience applying the ideas we’ve discussed so far and thus helps you build familiarity and become competent with these ideas. Thinking about the rhetorical machinations of pieces in this way now gives you some experience doing so in the future, experience which you can rely upon as you defend yourself from shysters.

For example, you could analyze some advertisement for weight loss medicine according to the psychology of persuasion; you could analyze political fundraising text messages according to Aristotelian rhetoric; you could consider how some specific meme persuades and entertains people in relation to its intertext and/or discourse community; and so on. These are just some ideas, but really, the sky is the limit.

Requirements:

The finished project must be a thesis driven analysis.
The thesis must answer my three questions, “what,” “how/why,” and “so-what.”
“What is happening?”
“How or why is that happening?”
“So-what,” i.e., “why does this matter and to whom?
