For this final assignment, you will create a video essay reflecting on what you have learned.

 

Assignment: Plan and record a 5-7 minute professional video essay featuring both video and audio elements and addressing the following:

As a kind of “thesis” for your video reflection, consider: What have you learned about who you are (or who you are becoming) as a thinker and writer? 
Develop the argument of this essay by answering at least two of these prompts:
Which major assignments were most influential to your development as a thinker and writer? Support your thesis about the kind of thinker/writer you were, are, or are becoming with examples from two of your Major Assignments.
What reading, podcast or video from the course do you connect most strongly with the type of thinker and writer you want to be? Why do you find this work compelling? Incorporate at least two specific references to this work.
What is one reading, podcast or video from the course that helped you identify habits/practices that you want to avoid? Explain why, incorporating at least one specific reference.
Conclude by reflecting on one of these prompts:
What habits and skills from this course do you want to take to future courses and contexts outside of college? Where have you seen the impact of this class so far (in other courses; in hobbies/activities; in conversations with friends/family; in your consumption of news/media; at your job; elsewhere)?
What lessons will you take away from the course as a whole? How would you describe your philosophy, attitude, or outlook on writing coming into this class, and how this has changed?
 

Tips for Success

Research shows that students who reflect on what they’ve learned have more success “transferring” that knowledge to their future lives and work. Do yourself the favor of taking your time to look back over the work you’ve done this semester and how it might serve you and your goals—personal, professional, or civic—in the future.
Show and tell: use the affordances of video to visually display the evidence you want to incorporate from class readings, assignments, etc. The experience of watching the video essay should be substantially different from listening to the audio alone.
I am your audience for this video, so feel free to adopt an informal—yet still professional—tone, incorporating humor, anecdotes from class, etc.
 

Length: 5-7 minutes

Sources: Cite sources and page numbers in a manner appropriate for a video essay. You do not need to include a formal Works Cited unless you cite sources from outside our class.

 

Addendum: 

Final reflections are often bogus. Many times, students assume this means they need to say whatever the teacher wants to hear, tell them the content mattered so very much when, in fact, it did not matter to them at all. Please don’t do that. Reflect honestly because this reflection is yours. The goal of a reflection is to build knowledge that you, the person reflecting, can take away. You're seeking, testing, and polishing diamonds from the rough, not for another's, but for your own sake.  

In this assignment, honestly reflect on your time and work in the course. Think and write about the thinking and the writing you’ve done. Consider any new habits you’ve picked up. Ask yourself how you might take the insights you’ve picked up or generated into your future classes. Reflect on what you still don’t know but want to learn. Did you answer your question from before? If so, do you have new questions? If not, how do you think you’ll answer that and what plans will you make to see that through? Did any of the ideas or approaches we talked about resonate with you? If so, which and why?

If you don’t feel you’ve learned anything, ask yourself why and reflect on that. Ask yourself what you would have liked to learn and consider how you might learn that on your own.

Use our tried-and-true thesis structure to generate and satisfy expectations
What, how, and so-what?
 

Rubric: See the “Argumentative Rubric”
